Add Signal Service Design Doc (#61)
OpenZeppelin/minimal-rollup: documentation/SignalServiceDesign.md

## Normal ‘slow’ Message Passing

> In our current protocol, signalling is performed by storing a message at a specific storage slot, then, once the L1 state root is accessible on the L2, executing a storage proof to verify that value exists. This proof can then trigger then certain logic, such as minting tokens.

Reviewer: Why don't we separate the general message passing from the bridging? I believe the initial section should focus on how general message passing works and then another section can explain bridges as a specific application of message passing

Author: okay i re-structured the document!

This is process is described by this diagram.

![Image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/5c27c6bc-cdd5-4964-8245-f5ae3f5b0272)

> Currently each application is responsible for their own signalling (i.e. there is no central storage of all signals). This means any potential relaying must be done on an app by app basis. We only provide a standard signalling library to store and verify signals on chain.

Reviewer: Should we also describe how the storage slot for signals is calculated and why?

Reviewer 2: Yes, I'll send a PR improving this section after we merge this.

> This approach has latency issues since the latest L1 state root may only update every X number of L2 blocks, causing newer L2 blocks to not have access to the most current L1 state root. This is why there is an alternative method used for message passing.

Reviewer: I suggest we provide some details about how and when the L1 state root is updated on the L2. I would also push the "there is an alternative method used for message passing..." to the next section
```suggestion
This approach works well, but has some latency since the latest L1 state root in the case of Taiko is only accessible when the L2 proposer submits a new publication to the L1 and includes a new anchor tx to the L2.
```

## Same Slot L1 → L2 Message Passing

The signal service (SS) is used for cases where the message is to be sent within the same slot. This [design](https://ethresear.ch/t/same-slot-l1-l2-message-passing/21186) is the one proposed by Nethermind. The basic idea is as follows:

1. The proposer listens to any signals being stored on the L1 SS
2. The proposer (during his allocated slot) can selectively inject L1 → L2 signals when proposing a batch in `publish` function.

> 3. Signals will be verified that they exist in the SS’s storage.

Reviewer: Who verifies this? Is the Inbox contract?

Author: sorry yes clarified now!

> 4. A trusted entity (owned by the rollup) will then call `receiveSignal` on the L2 SS. This will fill a mapping of `_receivedSignals` to true (signal —> true)

Reviewer: Why do you need a trusted entity? I don't remember this being necessary, nor is discussed in the post

Author: From my understanding the rollup operator will need to call 'recieveSignal' on the L2 - see [here](https://github.com/OpenZeppelin/minimal-rollup/pull/45/files#diff-6ae528a96677aaa2ece962de5d7439f828f82e8a6569167c37f4c622db744470R33). This because for 'fast' signals we need to trust that those signals were verified on the L1 since we dont have access to the L1 state root yet. Otherwise anyone could therotically fill the mapping and say the signal was received without providing a proof.

Reviewer 3: If I'm tracking the code correctly, the "trusted entity" here the TaikoAnchor contract, which is invoked by a hardcoded address that is known publicly. However, the Taiko state-transition-function (enforced by the provers) guarantees that there is exactly one such transaction at the start of every block.

In other words, this is a mechanism to let the proposer specify any signals that they want (which are then checked at publication time). I'll update the description accordingly

5. Any application that requires same slot signalling will just verify the signal is found in the `_receivedSignals` mapping i.e. they don’t need to provide a storage proof

## Future Considerations

- Merging fast and slow in the SS
- L2 → L1 fast withdrawals using solver [network](https://ethresear.ch/t/fast-and-slow-l2-l1-withdrawals/21161)
- Currently all signals cannot be cancelled and are stored indefinitely - perhaps we could look into allowing cancellable signals / reusing storage

## Questions

> - How do L2 applications have access to ‘trusted’ L1 state root?

Reviewer: Isn't this what the anchor transaction provides? Or do you mean something different here?

Author: sorry yes it was meant to be linked to the question below - removed now

- Usefulness of commitment syncer - how is this currently being used to get a trusted root.

> - L2 → L1 messaging

Reviewer: Do you mean this still needs to be designed or just documented? Because I believe the design is very similar, just in the other direction

## Signal

The Taiko stack refers to cross chain message passing as 'signalling'. The process of signalling consists of writing to a storage location so that it can later be proven on a destination chain using a storage proof.

A signal is stored at a pseudorandom storage slot derived via [erc7201](https://github.com/OpenZeppelin/openzeppelin-contracts/blob/ca7a4e39de0860bbaadf95824207886e6de9fa64/contracts/utils/SlotDerivation.sol#L4). This signal consists of the `msg.sender`, `chainId` and `value`.

## Normal ‘slow’ Message Passing

> In our current protocol, signalling is performed by storing a message at a specific storage slot, then, once the L1 state root is accessible on the L2, executing a storage proof to verify that value exists. This proof can then trigger then certain logic, such as minting tokens.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In our current protocol, signalling is performed by storing a message at a specific storage slot, then, once the L1 state root is accessible on the L2, executing a storage proof to verify that value exists. This proof can then trigger certain logic, such as minting tokens.
```

## Same Slot L1 → L2 Message Passing

The signal service (SS) is used for cases where the message is to be sent within the same slot. This [design](https://ethresear.ch/t/same-slot-l1-l2-message-passing/21186) is the one proposed by Nethermind. The basic idea is as follows:

1. The proposer listens to any signals being stored on the L1 SS
2. The proposer (during his allocated slot) can selectively inject L1 → L2 signals when proposing a batch in `publish` function.
3. The inbox contract will verify that the Signals exist in the SS’s storage.
4. A trusted entity (owned by the rollup) will then call `receiveSignal` on the L2 SS. This will fill a mapping of `_receivedSignals` to true (signal —> true)
5. Any application that requires same slot signalling will just verify the signal is found in the `_receivedSignals` mapping i.e. they don’t need to provide a storage proof

An example diagram is provided in the ETH bridge section.

---

## Bridging

Bridges are one of the main use cases of signalling.

> ### ETH Bridge

Reviewer 4: It’s worth noting that the ETH bridge is not just for transferring ETH across chains; it shall be able to interact with arbitrary contracts on the destination chain, passing custom calldata and a specified amount of Ether (msg.value). Essentially, it functions as a remote call bridge, with ETH bridging being the simplest use case

Author: Ah ok i didnt realise the eth bridge would handle contract calls as well - currently it seems to not be able to support this https://github.com/OpenZeppelin/minimal-rollup/blob/bridge/src/protocol/ETHBridge.sol#L60 as we hardcode 0 for the calldata

Reviewer 2: I guess @dantaik point is that we should elaborate more on the idea of generalized message passing mechanism. I will open a PR detailing more the general idea, the ETHBridge section can remain simple IMO

Reviewer 2: I think @dantaik has a good point here. Perhaps we want to have a bridge that allows arbitrary calls. If it's isolated (no other functionality), I don't see why that would be an issue.
